Papers for: renal failure


Title: Mutations in the mitochondrial seryl-tRNA synthetase cause hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure in infancy and alkalosis, HUPRA syndrome.
Abstract: An uncharacterized multisystemic mitochondrial cytopathy was diagnosed in two infants from consanguineous Palestinian kindred living in a single village. The most significant clinical findings were tubulopathy (hyperuricemia, metabolic alkalosis), pulmonary hypertension, and progressive renal failure in infancy (HUPRA syndrome). Analysis of the consanguineous pedigree suggested that the causative mutation is in the nuclear DNA. By using genome-wide SNP homozygosity analysis, we identified a homozygous identity-by-descent region on chromosome 19 and detected the pathogenic mutation c.1169A>G (p.Asp390Gly) in SARS2, encoding the mitochondrial seryl-tRNA synthetase. The same homozygous mutation was later identified in a third infant with HUPRA syndrome. The carrier rate of this mutation among inhabitants of this Palestinian isolate was found to be 1:15. The mature enzyme catalyzes the ligation of serine to two mitochondrial tRNA isoacceptors: tRNA(Ser)(AGY) and tRNA(Ser)(UCN). Analysis of amino acylation of the two target tRNAs, extracted from immortalized peripheral lymphocytes derived from two patients, revealed that the p.Asp390Gly mutation significantly impacts on the acylation of tRNA(Ser)(AGY) but probably not that of tRNA(Ser)(UCN). Marked decrease in the expression of the nonacylated transcript and the complete absence of the acylated tRNA(Ser)(AGY) suggest that this mutation leads to significant loss of function and that the uncharged transcripts undergo degradation.

Title: Genetic causes of hypomagnesemia, a clinical overview.
Abstract: Magnesium is essential to the proper functioning of numerous cellular processes. Magnesium ion (Mg(2+)) deficits, as reflected in hypomagnesemia, can cause neuromuscular irritability, seizures and cardiac arrhythmias. With normal Mg(2+) intake, homeostasis is maintained primarily through the regulated reabsorption of Mg(2+) by the thick ascending limb of Henle's loop and distal convoluted tubule of the kidney. Inadequate reabsorption results in renal Mg(2+) wasting, as evidenced by an inappropriately high fractional Mg(2+) excretion. Familial renal Mg(2+) wasting is suggestive of a genetic cause, and subsequent studies in these hypomagnesemic families have revealed over a dozen genes directly or indirectly involved in Mg(2+) transport. Those can be classified into four groups: hypercalciuric hypomagnesemias (encompassing mutations in CLDN16, CLDN19, CASR, CLCNKB), Gitelman-like hypomagnesemias (CLCNKB, SLC12A3, BSND, KCNJ10, FYXD2, HNF1B, PCBD1), mitochondrial hypomagnesemias (SARS2, MT-TI, Kearns-Sayre syndrome) and other hypomagnesemias (TRPM6, CNMM2, EGF, EGFR, KCNA1, FAM111A). Although identification of these genes has not yet changed treatment, which remains Mg(2+) supplementation, it has contributed enormously to our understanding of Mg(2+) transport and renal function. In this review, we discuss general mechanisms and symptoms of genetic causes of hypomagnesemia as well as the specific molecular mechanisms and clinical phenotypes associated with each syndrome.

Papers for: glaucoma


Title: Analysis of ASB10 variants in open angle glaucoma.
Abstract: Glaucoma is a common cause of visual disability and affects approximately 1.6% of individuals over 40 years of age ( 1). Non-synonymous coding sequence variations in the ankyrin repeat and SOCS box containing gene 10 (ASB10) were recently associated with 6.0% of cases of primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) in patients from Oregon and Germany. We tested a cohort of POAG patients (n= 158) and normal control subjects (n= 82), both from Iowa, for ASB10 mutations. Our study had 80% power to detect a 4.9% mutation frequency in POAG patients. A total of 11 non-synonymous coding sequence mutations were detected in the cohort, but no association with POAG was detected when analyzed individually or as a group (P > 0.05). Furthermore, a survey of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's (NHLBI's) Exome Sequencing Project revealed that non-synonymous ASB10 mutations are present in the general population at a far higher frequency than the prevalence of POAG. These data suggest that non-synonymous mutations in ASB10 do not cause Mendelian forms of POAG.

Title: Epigenome-Wide Analyses Identify Two Novel Associations With Recurrent Stroke in the Vitamin Intervention for Stroke Prevention Clinical Trial.
Abstract: DNA methylation, a well-characterized epigenetic modification that is influenced by both environment and genetic variation, has previously been implicated in a number of complex diseases, including cardiovascular disease and stroke. The goal of this study was to evaluate epigenome-wide associations with recurrent stroke and the folate one-carbon metabolism-related trait, plasma homocysteine (hcy). Differential methylation analyses were performed on 473,864 autosomal CpG loci, using Illumina HumanMethylation 450K array data in 180 ischemic stroke cases from the Vitamin Intervention for Stroke Prevention (VISP) clinical trial. Linear regression was used to assess associations between number of strokes prior to VISP enrollment and measures of hcy with degree of methylation (beta-values), while logistic regression was used to evaluate recurrent stroke status and incident recurrent stroke associations. All regression analyses were stratified by race. Two differentially methylated CpG sites exceeded epigenome-wide significance (p </= 1.055 x 10(-7)) for prior number of strokes (PNS) in European Americans. The top locus, cg22812874, was located in the ankyrin repeat and SOCS box containing 10 gene (ASB10; p = 3.4 x 10(-9); beta = -0.0308; 95% CI = -0.040, -0.002). Methylation locus cg00340919, located in an intron of the tetratricopeptide repeat domain 37 gene, was also statistically significant (TTC37; p = 8.74 x 10(-8); beta = -0.0517; 95% CI = -0.069, -0.034). An additional 138 CpG sites met our threshold for suggestive significance (p </= 5 x 10(-5)). We evaluated DNA methylation associated with recurrent stroke and hcy phenotypes across the epigenome. Hypermethylation at two CpG sites located in ASB10 and TTC37 was associated with fewer strokes prior to VISP enrollment. Our findings present a foundation for additional epigenome-wide studies, as well as mechanistic studies into epigenetic marks that influence recurrent stroke risk.

Papers for: optic-nerve degeneration


Title: Outcome of Frail Do-Not-Intubate Subjects With End-Stage Chronic Respiratory Failure and Their Opinion of Noninvasive Ventilation to Reverse Hypercapnic Coma.
Abstract: BACKGROUND: The use of noninvasive ventilation (NIV) in the emergency setting to reverse hypercapnic coma in frail patients with end-stage chronic respiratory failure and do-not-intubate orders remains a questionable issue given the poor outcome of this vulnerable population. We aimed to answer this issue by assessing not only subjects' outcome with NIV but also subjects' point of view regarding NIV for this indication. METHODS: A prospective observational case-control study was conducted in 3 French tertiary care hospitals during a 2-y period. Forty-three individuals who were comatose (with pH < 7.25 and P aCO2 > 100 mm Hg at admission) were compared with 43 subjects who were not comatose and who were treated with NIV for acute hypercapnic respiratory failure. NIV was applied by using the same protocol in both groups. They all had a do-not-intubate order and were considered vulnerable individuals with end-stage chronic respiratory failure according to well-validated scores. RESULTS: NIV yielded similar outcomes in the 2 groups regarding in-hospital mortality (n = 12 [28%] vs n = 12 [28%] in the noncomatose controls, P > .99) and 6-month survival (n = 28 [65%] vs n = 22 [51%] in the noncomatose controls, P = .31). Despite poor quality of life scores (21.5 +/- 10 vs 31 +/- 6 in the awakened controls, P = .056) as assessed by using the VQ11 questionnaire 6 months to 1 y after hospital discharge, a large majority of the survivors (n = 23 [85%]) would be willing to receive NIV again if a new episode of acute hypercapnic respiratory failure occurs. CONCLUSION: In the frailest subjects with supposed end-stage chronic respiratory failure that justifies treatment limitation decisions, it is worth trying NIV when acute hypercapnic respiratory failure occurs, even in the case of extreme respiratory acidosis with hypercapnic coma at admission.

Title: Analysis of Inherited Optic Neuropathies.
Abstract: BACKGROUND: Inherited optic neuropathies (IONs) cover a spectrum of clinically and genetically heterogenic conditions. Genetic evaluation of patients with IONs may enable their better clinico-diagnostic assessment and management of the disease. The aim of the present study was to determine the genetic condition related to the phenotype in patients with diverse inherited optic neuropathies. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study was performed in 12 adults and 8 children of 8 non-related families. Clinical phenotyping, supported by color fundus, FAF, and OCT imaging, was performed. Genetic testing was obtained for all family members suspected for ION. RESULTS: Identification of pathogenic mutations in eight non-related families helped to confirm the diagnosis of ION. Affected from ION were ten patients (eight adults and two children; four women and six men). Bilateral Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) was linked to the m.11778G>A mutation in two families (two affected and five carriers). Secondary homoplasmic LHON mutations in MT-ND1 (m.4216T>C) and MT-CO3 genes (m.9804G>A) were confirmed in two families (each one subject, three eyes affected), without detection of a primary LHON mutation. One member presented a picture of right-sited optic neuropathy associated with a c.220C>G mutation in the ACO2 gene and a heterozygous c.185C>T mutation in the LDLR gene. Autosomal dominant optic atrophy was confirmed in three non-related families (five subjects with bilateral ION), where molecular genetic analyses confirmed four different heterozygous mutations in OPA1: c.1847+1G>T; c.2497-1G>A, 297A>G and c.(2983+1_2984-1)_(c.*3211) (2 splicing mutations, 1 missense mutation, and 1 gross deletion encompassing exons 30 and 31). CONCLUSIONS: Combining clinics and molecular genetics when evaluating patients with IONs helps in characterizing disease and, therefore, is strongly recommended for such patients.

Papers for: spastic paraplegia


Title: Congenital disorders of autophagy: an emerging novel class of inborn errors of neuro-metabolism.
Abstract: Single gene disorders of the autophagy pathway are an emerging, novel and diverse group of multisystem diseases in children. Clinically, these disorders prominently affect the central nervous system at various stages of development, leading to brain malformations, developmental delay, intellectual disability, epilepsy, movement disorders, and neurodegeneration, among others. Frequent early and severe involvement of the central nervous system puts the paediatric neurologist, neurogeneticist, and neurometabolic specialist at the forefront of recognizing and treating these rare conditions. On a molecular level, mutations in key autophagy genes map to different stages of this highly conserved pathway and thus lead to impairment in isolation membrane (or phagophore) and autophagosome formation, maturation, or autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Here we discuss 'congenital disorders of autophagy' as an emerging subclass of inborn errors of metabolism by using the examples of six recently identified monogenic diseases: EPG5-related Vici syndrome, beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration due to mutations in WDR45, SNX14-associated autosomal-recessive cerebellar ataxia and intellectual disability syndrome, and three forms of hereditary spastic paraplegia, SPG11, SPG15 and SPG49 caused by SPG11, ZFYVE26 and TECPR2 mutations, respectively. We also highlight associations between defective autophagy and other inborn errors of metabolism such as lysosomal storage diseases and neurodevelopmental diseases associated with the mTOR pathway, which may be included in the wider spectrum of autophagy-related diseases from a pathobiological point of view. By exploring these emerging themes in disease pathogenesis and underlying pathophysiological mechanisms, we discuss how congenital disorders of autophagy inform our understanding of the importance of this fascinating cellular pathway for central nervous system biology and disease. Finally, we review the concept of modulating autophagy as a therapeutic target and argue that congenital disorders of autophagy provide a unique genetic perspective on the possibilities and challenges of pathway-specific drug development.

Title: Genetic and phenotypic characterization of complex hereditary spastic paraplegia.
Abstract: The hereditary spastic paraplegias are a heterogeneous group of degenerative disorders that are clinically classified as either pure with predominant lower limb spasticity, or complex where spastic paraplegia is complicated with additional neurological features, and are inherited in autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X-linked patterns. Genetic defects have been identified in over 40 different genes, with more than 70 loci in total. Complex recessive spastic paraplegias have in the past been frequently associated with mutations in SPG11 (spatacsin), ZFYVE26/SPG15, SPG7 (paraplegin) and a handful of other rare genes, but many cases remain genetically undefined. The overlap with other neurodegenerative disorders has been implied in a small number of reports, but not in larger disease series. This deficiency has been largely due to the lack of suitable high throughput techniques to investigate the genetic basis of disease, but the recent availability of next generation sequencing can facilitate the identification of disease-causing mutations even in extremely heterogeneous disorders. We investigated a series of 97 index cases with complex spastic paraplegia referred to a tertiary referral neurology centre in London for diagnosis or management. The mean age of onset was 16 years (range 3 to 39). The SPG11 gene was first analysed, revealing homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in 30/97 (30.9%) of probands, the largest SPG11 series reported to date, and by far the most common cause of complex spastic paraplegia in the UK, with severe and progressive clinical features and other neurological manifestations, linked with magnetic resonance imaging defects. Given the high frequency of SPG11 mutations, we studied the autophagic response to starvation in eight affected SPG11 cases and control fibroblast cell lines, but in our restricted study we did not observe correlations between disease status and autophagic or lysosomal markers. In the remaining cases, next generation sequencing was carried out revealing variants in a number of other known complex spastic paraplegia genes, including five in SPG7 (5/97), four in FA2H (also known as SPG35) (4/97) and two in ZFYVE26/SPG15 Variants were identified in genes usually associated with pure spastic paraplegia and also in the Parkinson's disease-associated gene ATP13A2, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis gene TPP1 and the hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy DNMT1 gene, highlighting the genetic heterogeneity of spastic paraplegia. No plausible genetic cause was identified in 51% of probands, likely indicating the existence of as yet unidentified genes.

Papers for: retinal degeneration


Title: Whole genome sequencing reveals novel mutations causing autosomal dominant inherited macular degeneration.
Abstract: BACKGROUND: Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common sight threatening condition. However, there are a number of monogenic macular dystrophies that are clinically similar to AMD, which can potentially provide pathogenetic insights. METHODS: Three siblings from a non-consanguineous Greek-Cypriot family reported central visual disturbance and nyctalopia. The patients had full ophthalmic examinations and color fundus photography, spectral-domain ocular coherence tomography and scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. Targeted polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed as a first step to attempt to identify suspected mutations in C1QTNF5 and TIMP3 followed by whole genome sequencing. RESULTS: The three patients were noted to have symptoms of nyctalopia, early paracentral visual field loss and, in older patients, central vision loss. Imaging identified pseudodrusen, retinal atrophy and RPE-Bruch's membrane separation. Whole genome sequencing of the proband revealed two novel heterozygous variants in C1QTNF5, c.556C>T, and c.569C>G. The mutation segregated with disease in this family, occurred in cis, and resulted in missense amino acid changes P186S and S190W in C1QTNF5. In silico modeling of the variants revealed that the S190W mutations was likely to have the greatest pathologic effect and that the combination of the mutations was likely to have an additive effect. CONCLUSIONS: The novel mutations in C1QTNF5 identified here expand the genotypic spectrum of mutations causing late-onset retinal dystrophy.

Title: Novel pathogenic mutations in C1QTNF5 support a dominant negative disease mechanism in late-onset retinal degeneration.
Abstract: Late-onset retinal degeneration (L-ORD) is a rare autosomal dominant retinal dystrophy, characterised by extensive sub-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) deposits, RPE atrophy, choroidal neovascularisation and photoreceptor cell death associated with severe visual loss. L-ORD shows striking phenotypic similarities to age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a common and genetically complex disorder, which can lead to misdiagnosis in the early stages. To date, a single missense mutation (S163R) in the C1QTNF5 gene, encoding C1q And Tumor Necrosis Factor Related Protein 5 (C1QTNF5) has been shown to cause L-ORD in a subset of affected families. Here, we describe the identification and characterisation of three novel pathogenic mutations in C1QTNF5 in order to elucidate disease mechanisms. In silico and in vitro characterisation show that these mutations perturb protein folding, assembly or polarity of secretion of C1QTNF5 and, importantly, all appear to destabilise the wildtype protein in co-transfection experiments in a human RPE cell line. This suggests that the heterozygous mutations in L-ORD show a dominant negative, rather than a haploinsufficient, disease mechanism. The function of C1QTNF5 remains unclear but this new insight into the pathogenetic basis of L-ORD has implications for future therapeutic strategies such as gene augmentation therapy.

Papers for: premature ovarian failure


Title: Genetics of primary ovarian insufficiency: new developments and opportunities.
Abstract: BACKGROUND: Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is characterized by marked heterogeneity, but with a significant genetic contribution. Identifying exact causative genes has been challenging, with many discoveries not replicated. It is timely to take stock of the field, outlining the progress made, framing the controversies and anticipating future directions in elucidating the genetics of POI. METHODS: A search for original articles published up to May 2015 was performed using PubMed and Google Scholar, identifying studies on the genetic etiology of POI. Studies were included if chromosomal analysis, candidate gene screening and a genome-wide study were conducted. Articles identified were restricted to English language full-text papers. RESULTS: Chromosomal abnormalities have long been recognized as a frequent cause of POI, with a currently estimated prevalence of 10-13%. Using the traditional karyotype methodology, monosomy X, mosaicism, X chromosome deletions and rearrangements, X-autosome translocations, and isochromosomes have been detected. Based on candidate gene studies, single gene perturbations unequivocally having a deleterious effect in at least one population include Bone morphogenetic protein 15 (BMP15), Progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1), and Fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) premutation on the X chromosome; Growth differentiation factor 9 (GDF9), Folliculogenesis specific bHLH transcription factor (FIGLA), Newborn ovary homeobox gene (NOBOX), Nuclear receptor subfamily 5, group A, member 1 (NR5A1) and Nanos homolog 3 (NANOS3) seem likely as well, but mostly being found in no more than 1-2% of a single population studied. Whole genome approaches have utilized genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to reveal loci not predicted on the basis of a candidate gene, but it remains difficult to locate causative genes and susceptible loci were not always replicated. Cytogenomic methods (array CGH) have identified other regions of interest but studies have not shown consistent results, the resolution of arrays has varied and replication is uncommon. Whole-exome sequencing in non-syndromic POI kindreds has only recently begun, revealing mutations in the Stromal antigen 3 (STAG3), Synaptonemal complex central element 1 (SYCE1), minichromosome maintenance complex component 8 and 9 (MCM8, MCM9) and ATP-dependent DNA helicase homolog (HFM1) genes. Given the slow progress in candidate-gene analysis and relatively small sample sizes available for GWAS, family-based whole exome and whole genome sequencing appear to be the most promising approaches for detecting potential genes responsible for POI. CONCLUSION: Taken together, the cytogenetic, cytogenomic (array CGH) and exome sequencing approaches have revealed a genetic causation in approximately 20-25% of POI cases. Uncovering the remainder of the causative genes will be facilitated not only by whole genome approaches involving larger cohorts in multiple populations but also incorporating environmental exposures and exploring signaling pathways in intragenic and intergenic regions that point to perturbations in regulatory genes and networks.

Title: Maternal immune activation alters brain microRNA expression in mouse offspring.
Abstract: Objective: Maternal immune activation (MIA) is associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in offspring. Herein, we investigate the altered expression of microRNAs (miRNA), and that of their target genes, in the brains of MIA mouse offspring. Methods: To generate MIA model mice, pregnant mice were injected with polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid on embryonic day 12.5. We performed miRNA microarray and mRNA sequencing in order to determine the differential expression of miRNA and mRNA between MIA mice and controls, at 3 weeks of age. We further identified predicted target genes of dysregulated miRNAs, and miRNA-target interactions, based on the inverse correlation of their expression levels. Results: Mice prenatally subjected to MIA exhibited behavioral abnormalities typical of ASD, such as a lack of preference for social novelty and reduced prepulse inhibition. We found 29 differentially expressed miRNAs (8 upregulated and 21 downregulated) and 758 differentially expressed mRNAs (542 upregulated and 216 downregulated) in MIA offspring compared to controls. Based on expression levels of the predicted target genes, 18 downregulated miRNAs (340 target genes) and three upregulated miRNAs (60 target genes) were found to be significantly enriched among the differentially expressed genes. miRNA and target gene interactions were most significant between mmu-miR-466i-3p and Hfm1 (ATP-dependent DNA helicase homolog), and between mmu-miR-877-3p and Aqp6 (aquaporin 6). Interpretation: Our results provide novel information regarding miRNA expression changes and their putative targets in the early postnatal period of brain development. Further studies will be needed to evaluate potential pathogenic roles of the dysregulated miRNAs.

Papers for: epilepsy


Title: Congenital lactic acidosis, cerebral cysts and pulmonary hypertension in an infant with FOXRED1 related complex I deficiency.
Abstract: Mitochondrial complex I is encoded by 38 nuclear-encoded and 7 mitochondrial-encoded genes. FOXRED1 is one of the 13 additional nuclear genes known as assembly factors. So far, four patients have been described with complex I deficiency caused by autosomal recessive mutations in FOXRED1. Here, we report the fifth patient with FOXRED1 related complex 1 deficiency presenting with prenatal onset of bilateral periventricular cysts, congenital lactic acidosis, and persistent life-limiting pulmonary hypertension. Whole exome sequencing identified a compound heterozygosity for a known pathogenic variant (c.612_615dupAGTG; p.A206SfsX15) (paternal) and a likely pathogenic variant (c.874G>A; p.Gly292Arg) (maternal). Deficiency of complex I was demonstrated by the absence of complex I on Blue Native Gel Electrophoresis and by a significantly reduced complex I enzyme activity in the patient's fibroblasts. Compared with the previous known FOXRED1 cases, unique clinical features observed in our patient include bilateral periventricular cysts and severe pulmonary hypertension. Whole exome sequencing was instrumental in recognizing the underlying gene defect in this patient.

Title: MiR-195 modulates oxidative stress-induced apoptosis and mitochondrial energy production in human trophoblasts via flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent oxidoreductase domain-containing protein 1 and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase regulatory subunit.
Abstract: OBJECTIVE: Preeclampsia is a severe pregnancy-specific syndrome defined as newly onset hypertension and proteinuria. Abnormal placental development has been generally accepted as the initial cause of the disorder. Recently, miR-195 was identified as one of the downregulated small RNAs in preeclamptic placentas. METHODS: The potential targets of miR-195 in human trophoblast cells were screened by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification-based mass spectrum analysis. Localization of miR-195 and its targets was examined by in-situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry in human placenta. Real-time PCR, western blotting and luciferase assay were used for target validation. Apoptosis was accessed by Annexin V/PI costaining, whereas mitochondrial function by ATP measurement and tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester fluorescence. RESULTS: Two mitochondria-associated proteins, flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent oxidoreductase domain-containing protein 1 (FOXRED1) and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase regulatory subunit (PDPR), were identified as targets of miR-195. Overexpression of miR-195 in HTR8/SVneo cells resulted in enhanced apoptosis, decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and cellular ATP content upon hydrogen peroxide stimulation. The effects could be partially rescued by FOXRED1 or PDPR. In preeclamptic patients, lowered circulating level of miR-195 were found at early-to-mid gestation and term pregnancy, and marked increase in FOXRED1 and PDPR expression were observed in the placenta when compared with gestational week-matched controls. In addition, chronic hydrogen peroxide stimuli suppressed miR-195 expression in trophoblast cells. CONCLUSION: MiR-195 could suppress mitochondrial energy production via targeting FOXRED1 and PDPR, and lead to trophoblast cell apoptosis under oxidative stress. In preeclamptic placenta, lowered level of miR-195 might be induced by chorionic oxidative stress and subsequently form a compensation mechanism to defend the disturbed energy production and cell apoptosis upon oxidative stress.

Papers for: mandibulofacial dysostosis


Title: Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in a child with Treacher Collins syndrome.
Abstract: BACKGROUND: Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) mainly presents with severe craniofacial developmental abnormalities characterized by a combination of bilateral downward-slanting palpebral fissures, colobomas of the lower eyelids, hypoplasia of the facial bones, cleft palate, malformation of the external ears, atresia of the external auditory canals, and bilateral conductive hearing loss. It is due to mutations in Treacher Collins syndrome 1 (TCOF1) (5q32-q33.1) and Polymerase RNA 1 polypeptides D and C (POLR1D [13q12.2], and POLR1C [6p21.1]) genes, which are responsible for increased neuroepithelial apoptosis during embryogenesis resulting in the lack of neural crest cells involved in facial bone and cartilage formation. Altered function of the upper digestive tract has been reported, whereas severe dysmotility disorders have never been reported. We describe here the first case of TCS associated with histologically proven chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIPO) in humans. Case presentatios A 12-year-old boy with TCS due to TCOF1 gene deletion experienced nutritional difficulties and digestive intolerance from birth. CIPO was suspected during childhood because of severe intestinal dysmotility leading to enteral-jejunal nutrition intolerance and dependence on total parenteral nutrition. Diagnosis of CIPO with nervous abnormalities was histologically confirmed on a surgical rectal biopsy that showed enlarged ganglionic myenteric plexus. At the age of 9 years, an isolated colonic stenosis without dilatation responsible for severe abdominal pain and altered quality of life led to digestive derivation contributing to rapid disappearance of chronic abdominal pain. At the age of 12 years, the patient was still dependent on total home parenteral nutrition 7 days a week to maintain regular growth velocity. CONCLUSION: Recently, mice studies have pointed out the role played by TCOF1 in ganglionic cell migration in the foregut, suggesting that the synergistic haploinsufficiency of Tcof1 and Pax3, a transcription factor regulating the RET gene involved in disorders of neural crest cell development, probably results in colonic aganglionosis and may explain the association described here between TCS and CIPO. This case may correspond to this possible mechanism in humans. These findings and our clinical report suggest that CIPO may be assessed as unusual digestive manifestations in TCS with TCOF1 deletion.

Title: Treacher Collins Syndrome
Abstract: CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is characterized by bilateral and symmetric downslanting palpebral fissures, malar hypoplasia, micrognathia, and external ear abnormalities. Hypoplasia of the zygomatic bones and mandible can cause significant feeding and respiratory difficulties. About 40%-50% of individuals have conductive hearing loss attributed most commonly to malformation of the ossicles and hypoplasia of the middle ear cavities. Inner ear structures tend to be normal. Other, less common abnormalities include cleft palate and unilateral or bilateral choanal stenosis or atresia. Typically intellect is normal. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TCS is established in about 96% of probands by detection of a heterozygous (autosomal dominant) pathogenic variant in TCOF1 or POLR1D or biallelic (autosomal recessive) pathogenic variants in POLR1C or POLR1D using molecular genetic testing and in about 4% of probands by clinical findings when molecular genetic testing has not been performed or does not identify pathogenic variants in one of the known genes. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment should be tailored to the specific needs of each individual, preferably by a multidisciplinary craniofacial management team. Neonates with airway issues may require special positioning or tracheostomy to facilitate ventilation. Hearing loss is treated with bone conduction amplification, speech therapy, and educational intervention. Craniofacial reconstruction is often necessary. Cleft palate repair (if needed) occurs at about age one year; zygomatic and orbital reconstruction at about age five to seven years; and bilateral microtia and/or narrow ear canal reconstruction after age six years. The age of maxillomandibular reconstruction varies by severity; orthognathic therapies are typically before age 16 years. GENETIC COUNSELING: Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive manner. Autosomal dominant TCS. About 54%-60% of probands have the disorder as the result of a de novo TCOF1 or POLR1D pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with TCS has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Autosomal recessive TCS. The parents of a child with autosomal recessive TCS are obligate heterozygotes (i.e., carriers of one POLR1C or POLR1D pathogenic variant). At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the TCS-related pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic diagnosis are possible.

Papers for: neuropathy


Title: The genetic landscape of Parkinson's disease.
Abstract: The cause of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains unknown in most patients. Since 1997, with the first genetic mutation known to cause PD described in SNCA gene, many other genes with Mendelian inheritance have been identified. We summarize genetic, clinical and neuropathological findings related to the 27 genes reported in the literature since 1997, associated either with autosomal dominant (AD): LRRK2, SNCA, VPS35, GCH1, ATXN2, DNAJC13, TMEM230, GIGYF2, HTRA2, RIC3, EIF4G1, UCHL1, CHCHD2, and GBA; or autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance: PRKN, PINK1, DJ1, ATP13A2, PLA2G6, FBXO7, DNAJC6, SYNJ1, SPG11, VPS13C, PODXL, and PTRHD1; or an X-linked transmission: RAB39B. Clinical and neuropathological variability among genes is great. LRRK2 mutation carriers present a phenotype similar to those with idiopathic PD whereas, depending on the SNCA mutations, the phenotype ranges from early onset typical PD to dementia with Lewy bodies, including many other atypical forms. DNAJC6 nonsense mutations lead to a very severe phenotype whereas DNAJC6 missense mutations cause a more typical form. PRKN, PINK1 and DJ1 cases present with typical early onset PD with slow progression, whereas other AR genes present severe atypical Parkinsonism. RAB39B is responsible for a typical phenotype in women and a variable phenotype in men. GBA is a major PD risk factor often associated with dementia. A growing number of reported genes described as causal genes (DNAJC13, TMEM230, GIGYF2, HTRA2, RIC3, EIF4G1, UCHL1, and CHCHD2) are still awaiting replication or indeed have not been replicated, thus raising questions as to their pathogenicity. Phenotypic data collection and next generation sequencing of large numbers of cases and controls are needed to differentiate pathogenic dominant mutations with incomplete penetrance from rare, non-pathogenic variants. Although known genes cause a minority of PD cases, their identification will lead to a better understanding their pathological mechanisms, and may contribute to patient care, genetic counselling, prognosis determination and finding new therapeutic targets.

Title: Human SPG11 cerebral organoids reveal cortical neurogenesis impairment.
Abstract: SPG11 linked hereditary spastic paraplegia is a complex monogenic neurodegenerative disease that in addition to spastic paraplegia is characterized by childhood onset cognitive impairment, thin corpus callosum and enlarged ventricles. We have previously shown impaired proliferation of SPG11 neural progenitor cells (NPCs). For delineation of potential defect in SPG11 brain development we employ 2D culture systems and 3D human brain organoids derived from SPG11 patients' iPSC and controls. We reveal that an increased rate of asymmetric divisions of neural progenitor cells leads to proliferation defect, causing premature neurogenesis. Correspondingly, SPG11 organoids appeared smaller than controls and had larger ventricles as well as thinner germinal wall. Premature neurogenesis and organoid size were rescued by GSK3-inhibititors including the FDA-approved tideglusib. These findings shed light on the neurodevelopmental mechanisms underlying disease pathology.

Papers for: arachnodactyly


Title: CHST14/D4ST1 deficiency: New form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Abstract: Carbohydrate sulfotransferase 14/dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase-1 (CHST14/D4ST1) deficiency represents a specific form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) caused by recessive loss-of-function mutations in CHST14. The disorder has been independently termed "adducted thumb-clubfoot syndrome", "EDS, Kosho type", and "EDS, musculocontractural type". To date, 31 affected patients from 21 families have been described. Clinically, CHST14/D4ST1 deficiency is characterized by multiple congenital malformations (craniofacial features including large fontanelle, hypertelorism, short and downslanting palpebral fissures, blue sclerae, short nose with hypoplastic columella, low-set and rotated ears, high palate, long philtrum, thin upper lip vermilion, small mouth, and micro-retrognathia; multiple congenital contractures including adduction-flexion contractures and talipes equinovarus as well as other visceral or ophthalmological malformations) and progressive multisystem fragility-related complications (skin hyperextensibility, bruisability, and fragility with atrophic scars; recurrent dislocations; progressive talipes or spinal deformities; pneumothorax or pneumohemothorax; large subcutaneous hematomas; and diverticular perforation). Etiologically, multisystem fragility is presumably caused by impaired assembly of collagen fibrils resulting from loss of dermatan sulfate (DS) in the decorin glycosaminoglycan side chain that promotes electrostatic binding between collagen fibrils. This is the first reported human disorder that specifically affects biosynthesis of DS. Its clinical characteristics indicate that CHST14/D4ST1 and, more fundamentally, DS, play a critical role in fetal development and maintenance of connective tissues in multiple organs. Considering that patients with CHST14/D4ST1 deficiency develop progressive multisystem fragility-related manifestations, establishment of a comprehensive and detailed natural history and health-care guidelines as well as further elucidation of the pathophysiology in view of future etiology-based therapy are crucial.

Title: Defect in dermatan sulfate in urine of patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome caused by a CHST14/D4ST1 deficiency.
Abstract: PURPOSE: Dermatan sulfate (DS) plays a number of roles in a wide range of biological activities such as cell signaling and tissue morphogenesis through interactions with various extracellular matrix proteins including collagen. Mutations in the carbohydrate sulfotransferase 14 gene (CHST14) encoding CHST14/dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase-1 (D4ST1), which is responsible for the biosynthesis of DS, cause a recently delineated form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS, musculocontractural type 1), an autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder characterized by congenital malformations (specific craniofacial features, and congenital multiple contractures) and progressive fragility-related complications (skin hyperextensibility, bruisability, and fragility with atrophic scars; recurrent dislocations; progressive talipes or spinal deformities; and large subcutaneous hematomas). In an attempt to develop a diagnostic screening method for this type of EDS, the amount of DS in the urine of patients was analyzed. METHODS: Urinary DS was quantified by an anion-exchange chromatography after treatment with DS-specific degrading enzyme. RESULTS: DS was not detected in the urine of patients with homo- or compound heterozygous mutations in CHST14. These results suggest that the quantification of DS in urine is applicable to an initial diagnosis of DS-defective EDS. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to perform a urinary disaccharide compositional analysis of chondroitin sulfate (CS)/DS chains in patients with EDS caused by a CHST14/D4ST1 deficiency, and demonstrated the absence of DS chains. This result suggests systemic DS depletion in this disorder, and also proposes the usefulness of a urinary disaccharide compositional analysis of CS/DS chains as a non-invasive screening method for this disorder.

